[Music]
This is business breakdowns.
Business breakdowns is a series of
conversations with investors and
operators diving deep into a single
business. For each business, we explore
its history, its business model, its
competitive advantages, and what makes
it tick.
We believe every business has lessons
and secrets that investors and operators
can learn from and we are here to bring
them to you. To find more episodes of
breakdowns, check out join colossus.com.
All opinions expressed by hosts and
podcast guests are solely their own
opinions. Hosts, podcast guests, their
employers or affiliates may maintain
positions in the securities discussed in
this podcast. This podcast is
forformational purposes only and should
not be relied upon as a basis for
investment decisions.
This is Matt Russell and today we are
breaking down Agyant. If you aren't
familiar with Agyant, it is a $30
billion market cap company at the time
of this recording and they focus on one
of the more interesting niches,
equipment and instruments sold into
laboratories. So you can think of this
equipment being sold to the life
sciences sector, diagnostics,
applied chemical markets, some very
unique R&D work. My guest is Mark Dvas,
fund manager at Troy Asset Management.
And Mark brings us through the story of
Agelant. This is something that was born
within Huelet Packard, spun off a little
more than 25 years ago. And Mark helps
break down what can be a very
complicated concept around things like
cromatography and some of the other
things that Agyant's involved in. But
this is a deeply ingrained industry
player with a unique razor and razor
blade model and a business that has
evolved over time. These episodes tend
to be my favorite and this one lives up
to the others. Please enjoy this
breakdown of Agyant.
All right, Mark, I am excited to have
you here to talk Agyant. We were
laughing a bit last week before the
episode. One of the key things is just
going to be establishing what Agyant
actually is, what they do. I love these
niche industries and the niche
businesses that don't get as much
airtime or coverage. Let's just start
there. Do your best simple overview of
what Agyant does as a business.
>> Agyant is a leading provider of
instruments, services, and consumables
for labs. Sounds simple. You can picture
one of their typical agyant instruments
to be about the size of a small fridge,
maybe on a lab bench, something like
that. And its core use case is to tell
you what molecules are in a sample that
you're testing. A real world use case of
this might be you've got a
pharmaceutical company producing a drug.
Let's say they're making aspirin and
they take one tablet off the production
line for every thousand tablets that
they make or something like that. Those
samples could be run through an agent
piece of equipment and they would be
testing to check they have the right
amount of the active ingredient in them
and importantly that there are no
contaminants in them as well. Agent will
sell them the instrument that can
analyze that sample and also provide the
ongoing service supports and consumables
needed to run the instrument. If I'm
thinking about this right, it's mostly
bio medical type work that they're
operating around and specifically in the
labs of those businesses. Is that a fair
way to categorize their end market?
>> Yes, the business itself is actually
pretty broad today. They're in 110
countries today, 285,000 labs. So, it's
pretty broad, split between, you know,
America's Europe and AP pack. In terms
of the actual markets, the kind of end
customers, pharmaceutical customers are
the largest end market for them. So,
that's about a third of their sales or
so. Academia and government, you can
imagine universities use stuff. That's
another 10% or so. About 20% of the
business is chemicals or advanced
materials, which is interesting. So you
could think of battery testing for EVs
or semiconductor production. And another
20% is actually food and environmental
testing. So this would be for
contaminants perhaps in your water
supply, something like that.
>> Is there any way to measure how big of a
market this actually is? I'm always
curious with these niche industries that
revolve around very big end markets as
it relates to drugs or anything along
those lines. How do you categorize just
overall market size for an agyant?
Agelant do publish a sort of total
address buildable market stat and it's $
160 billion which is unsurprisingly a
really big number when you think about
all the companies and businesses in the
world that need to test samples. Agent's
revenue today is about $6.5 billion much
smaller than that TAM number. In reality
actually when you dig into those niche
and markets they generally have a number
one or two position in most of their key
markets. It's generally a pretty stable
competitor set. If a company publishes a
TAM number, it's probably going to be a
big one. That's a fair way, but
interesting to get that context of 6 and
a half versus 150 just for perspective.
Let's go back to the origin of the
business. Where did Agyant come from?
What is the origin story? How long has
it been around? Anything that's key to
its history that you would include?
>> I think Agelant has a really interesting
history. It actually starts way back in
1938. Huelet Packard or HP started by
two electrical engineers. So Bill Hulet
and Dave Packard work in the garage.
Yeah, pretty well-known story. And the
first product they developed, of course,
was actually a testing instrument. It
was used to test audio equipment used by
Disney in the production of Fantasia,
the movie way back then. Over the years,
HP built out their testing and
measurement business, both electrical
testing, but also over time for
molecular analysis. And this included
the acquisition of a small business
called F&M Scientific in 1965. That
business had quickly become the leader
in what's called gas chromatography
instruments. Their instruments were used
for the first full-scale testing for
steroids in the 1972 Munich Summer
Olympics. The business continued to grow
over the years that followed. In 1999,
HP focused more on its computer
business, and they spun out several
businesses, including testing and
measurement into a new business called
Agyant. HP kept their computing and
imaging business with everything else
going into Agyant. It was a bit of a
mixture of assets that they inherited,
but there was also some real gems in
there. obviously years or decades of R&D
particularly in chromatography. In the
years that followed, the agyant
management team refocused on its
molecular testing business. So they sold
their medical business to Philillips in
2001. They actually had a pretty
successful semiconductor component
business that they sold in 2005 to KKR
and Silverlake. This would go on to
become a Vargo, which then became
Broadcom after they bought it. So it's
been tremendously successful on its own.
In 2014, that's the most recent
significant change. So Agent spun out
their electronic measurement business
into a separately listed company called
Ksite Technologies. It's still listed
today. It's doing well. That's really
important. At the time it was about 40%
of sales they were spinning out. And
Ksite, whilst it was a great business,
was selling equipment predominantly used
for testing electronic devices during
manufacture. So this was a really
cyclical business and didn't really
closely align with the rest of what
Agelant was doing. The business that
remained was entirely focused on
analytical equipment for the life
sciences, diagnostics, and chemicals
market. So much more focus. What the
management team was trying to do was
have a much more clean, predictable,
less volatile business, but still have
those long-term growth drivers. It's
very interesting when you find these
family trees. Standard oil being one
that broke up, but all essentially in
the oil business in various forms. HP
being a new one that prior to this
episode I didn't appreciate just how
much had been born out of that family.
Quite some impressive market caps on
those businesses that you referenced.
You mentioned the electrical testing
versus molecular testing feels very
different to me in terms of yes they're
both testing something at the surface
level but molecular versus electrical
feels like it's very wide gap. Was there
a certain cultural DNA or recruiting
mechanism that they got people attracted
to the overall HP brand that allowed
them to do that? This is a bit of a
segue, but I am curious how they were
able to foster innovation in two
relatively different categories, at
least to my brain. I think they
inherited a lot of people. So, Agent is
still based in Santa Clara. I think
they're about 20-minute drive, their
current HQ, from the original HP garage
where it all started. There's obviously
this sort of HP way culture as well,
which we obviously own the shares. We've
been impressed with the way that they
run the business for the long term. The
way they look after their people, you
kind of get a sense for it, but we
experienced that in COVID where right
off the bat they were first out the
doors saying no one in this company is
losing their jobs or anything like that.
I think that builds up loyalty and it's
not unusual when we meet the managers.
They're generally agent lifers that
started as engineers. It's interesting
where you might have a separation, but
there still exists some type of relation
to the original family tree and some of
the talent that comes along with it. You
mentioned when we were talking before a
bit of a razor razor blade approach with
their business, how would you categorize
what they're doing beyond selling just
equipment outright?
>> In terms of how I think about the
business, about a third of it is selling
instruments. The largest category of
which is chromatography instruments.
These are large sort of initial sales
and then two/irds of the business is
selling consumables, servicing or
software which are mostly related to the
instruments they're selling. So it's
that roughly 1/3 2/3 split. I've
mentioned chromatography a few times.
What this actually is is a machine that
forces a sample, it could be a liquid or
a gas at pressure through something
called a column. You can think of a
column as a metal tube that's stuffed
with material that slows down the
molecules in that sample at different
rates. This means that the liquid or gas
separates into different molecule groups
as it passes through that column. And
then on the output of the machine,
you've got a sensor that detects the
molecules now separated. And depending
on the type of sensor, it could also
quantify how much of those different
molecules coming out. So it's a powerful
tool. Typically, when they're selling
one of those instruments, a
chromatography instrument, it will cost
around $100,000. Obviously, there's a
huge range, but let's go with that for
now. And it's got a useful life of about
6 to 10 years. Over that useful life,
the customer will typically spend
another $100,000 on ongoing consumable
and servicing spend. That spend is split
roughly equally between physical
consumables and service costs. So, just
talking about the consumables for a
second. The bulk of that expense is
those columns that we just described.
They've got a limited period of use,
perhaps maybe 2,000 samples, something
like that. and you need to replace them
as the columns responsible for
separating out that material and it's
degraded by high temperature or extreme
pH levels things like that and that
impacts the resolution of the instrument
these are used for pretty critical
applications you basically have to
replace it often it wouldn't be unusual
to hear a customer replace it every
month or so servicing is a bit different
it's more focused on repairs
recalibration cleaning or a service
called qualification where they will be
validating the machine is operating
correctly so I saying Agyant is one of
only two companies that has the ability
to service other companies equipment in
the same lab as well. So it's a pretty
big benefit if you're dealing with a
large customer and increasingly agent
services are sold as part of a broader
service contract that's agreed when they
sell the new instruments. One of the
ways to judge it would be they publish a
number that's the percentage of
instruments out there that have active
service contracts. It's called the
attach rate and it's been steadily
increasing over time. So it's gone over
the last five years from a sort of high
20s number to a low30s percent and we
expect it to continue to grow about a
percentage point a year. This is a great
business. It sounds boring but the bulk
of agent's customers are operating in
regulated industries where they need to
spend on consumables and servicing if
they're using the instrument. The
example I gave earlier quite often the
quality control process will be written
into the FDA approval for a drug and
they might even mention the exact
instrument and consumables being used.
Once that happens and it's approved,
it's expensive for the customer to move
to a different instrument and also
there's some risks attached with that.
So, it gives a really nice recurring
revenue on that consumable service
spend.
>> Is it right to think about the agyant
equipment being used in the assembly
line essentially once a drug has already
passed the approval rather than in the
original testing or drug development
stage?
>> They straddle both. I think probably
you're right though in that the sales
split would skew towards production.
They definitely make those cutting edge
instruments which you use for your
research and development. There's just a
lot more production out there. When you
look at the innovations, there's
definitely innovations around making the
machines higher resolution, more
accurate, but actually a lot of the
innovations are focused on throughput
where this is a lab that's testing
10,000 samples a day. And if you can do
it with one less instrument, then that's
a big saving. My next natural question
was going to be what governs the
decision for a lab to buy another piece
of equipment, another agyant system. Do
you see labs with multiple on their
assembly line or is there typically just
one associated with each drug? I'm
trying to understand whether it's
capacity constraints or what drives
that.
>> Typically in a production center, you'd
have a lab attached to it and they would
have several instruments as part of that
and generally they will choose a single
primary supplier. They may have a sort
of secondary supplier there as well, but
just for simplicity in terms of having
spare parts on site, ongoing service and
support, it's generally just easier to
have one instrument when they're
considering going from that fourth to
that fifth machine. They're considering
the service they've received. I think
most customers would probably highlight
service as the primary driver of their
decision. It's worth saying the machines
are complex. There is a technical
capability, so it's not like there's 500
options out there. It's a reasonably
small group that you got to choose from.
But Agent is this one-stop shop where
you can get your instrument, you can get
your consumables, you can get your
servicing, you know, all in one package.
>> Talk a little bit about the competition.
You mentioned there's one other
competitor that can actually service
third party machines as well. What does
the competition look like? Maybe we can
start just in the equipment segment and
branch out from there.
>> Generally, they're competing, I'd say,
against two main businesses. There are
others, but two main ones. one being a
company called Waters and another called
Thermoffisher Scientific. Waters is a
strong competitor in liquid
chromatography, but it's more narrowly
focused on the pharmaceutical market. So
around 60% of their sales are from
pharmaceutical customers. They're also a
smaller business. So revenue for waters
about half that of Agelin, so around $3
billion. Adjun's just above six.
Thermopish is almost the opposite. It's
a huge business, $43 billion of revenue
built largely through acquisitions. And
if you to open a thermopisher scientific
catalog, you would see there's a much
broader array of products. So they sell
everything lab fridges, test tubes, hot
plates, centrifuges, lab shakers, water
baths, etc. as well as the
chromatography instruments that actually
compete with Agelant. So maybe a bit
less of a specialist in that sense. What
drew us to Agelant was its diversified
exposure by end market, but also its
focus on niches where it has high market
share. Can you talk a little bit about
those niches? If you take a waters who's
entirely focused on pharma, what would
be the other categories or niches within
those categories that would be
highlights for an agyant?
>> Gas chromatography is the golden
business within agilant. That's
obviously where it came from. So F&M
Scientific originally that HP bought,
they were a gas chromatography
specialist. Agyant is still by far the
market leader in gas chromatography.
They're probably twothirds of the global
market for those instruments. they
really dominate there. The difference
between gas and liquid is predominantly
driven by the the sample. So gas,
unsurprising, you're testing a gas. The
way you get it to a gas is you heat it
or you burn it. If you're a
pharmaceutical company and you're
testing a complex protein or something,
you can't heat it up because you'll
destroy it in the process. So therefore,
you have to test it as a liquid. So
generally gas chromatography skews what
we'll call applied markets. So you can
think of that as battery testing,
environmental testing for contaminants
and pollutants and things like that.
They're really uniquely strong, I would
say, in applied markets for gas
chromatography.
>> These examples, they're reminding me of
refineries from oil and gas just in the
way that they can handle this input and
turn it into many bride products or
outputs. There's a lot of differences,
but it's interesting how much similarity
there is.
>> One of their customers is testing the
outputs of refineries. Obviously, there
are other areas as well where they're
pretty strong. So, liquid chromatography
is the other one. They're probably about
a third of the market. Waters probably
has about a third of that market as
well. And then the balance is smaller
players and thermos showing the risk.
They're also pretty strong in
spectroscopy. So, that's 40 50% of the
market. I'd say that gas chromatography
and applied is a postchild market.
>> I would assume that a lot of the
consumables and maintenance has somewhat
of a reoccurring or straightforward
measurement from year to year. the new
equipment sales. You have this 6 to 8
year useful life. Are there major cycles
boom bust oriented that don't just
revolve around customer losses? From an
industry perspective, have there been
tailwinds or headwinds that have
resulted in shocks over time?
>> In short, yes. Agent's obviously pretty
diversified by end market, which has
meant when there's been cycles in some
of their smaller markets, they've kind
of been able to weather it. One end
market's a bit weaker, another market's
doing a bit better. Generally they
struggle when their largest
pharmaceutical companies when that's
doing badly which we've just hopefully
we're seeing the other side of now
they're just coming out of a sort of
downturn there effectively what happened
was you obviously had the co9 pandemic
there was a lot of investment from
pharmaceutical companies into building
out lab capacity and spending on R&D and
they bought well above the normal level
of instruments so you saw this boom in
instrument sales growth and then of
course the CFO turns around and goes
we've got lots of instruments we don't
need to buy anymore for a couple of
years you see the other side of that it
looks like we're just returning back
towards normal purchase levels now. So
hopefully that's behind them. The other
notable area is China. So China is about
18% of group sales. It's half of that
Asia Pacific region. Obviously there's
been challenges in China. It's a market
that's led quite heavily by government
grants as well to local companies that
then go on and buy agelant pieces of
equipment. Basically we've been through
a sort of down cycle there. Again, it
looks like that's improving at the
moment. for something like the COVID
shock where you had this major
investment when you think about the
useful life of that equipment and at
some point towards the end of the decade
you'll come up on that 6 to8 years is
the expectation that there would be
renewals do pharmaceuticals tend to take
capacity offline if it's related to
something which has a shorter life cycle
how does that work just in terms of the
visibility that you might have on the 6
to 8 years and the replacement cycle
cycles coming through and showing up in
revenue.
>> I think just talking about
pharmaceuticals, there should be growth
really in pharmaceutical R&D spend over
the long term. We expect to see growth
there driven by increasing demand for
health care, whether that's aging
populations. I know the World Health
Organization has population over 60
nearly doubling to 2050. Things like
that are just going to drive healthcare
spend in our opinion in one direction
and that's a tailwind for agelant. The
reality in the short term is that if an
instrument's six years old, they could
of course run it until it's eight years.
There's nothing, it doesn't stop
working, the parts are still available,
they definitely could. What the drives
are for that upgrade tend to be these
instruments are operating at high
temperature with sometimes nasty
chemicals inside them. All components in
them will eventually wear out. You've
got the consumables which are designed
to be replaced, but you can think of all
the valves, the heaters, everything else
will just start to break more after a
long period of time. and lab downtime is
problematic for these pharmaceutical
companies. They'll want to be getting
rid of these instruments before they
start to see a fair amount of downtime,
which will naturally happen as they
become older instruments. They'll just
be looking to upgrade. The other thing
is there are typically reasonably
significant upgrades to the platform
every 3 years or so. After six years,
you're probably two years, maybe eight
years, three upgrade cycles in. And
there should be a meaningful upgrade in
terms of either resolution or
throughput, which should help justify
the upgrade spend effectively.
>> With the competition, you mentioned that
service is a major driver of the
decision-m there. When it comes to
innovation,
has there been a historical trend line
for Agyant or maybe a competitor where
innovation has really driven market
share gains or someone moving up the
chain in terms of what they've captured
of the market? I don't think so. We
talked to the companies a fair bit and
they talk about reasonably stable market
shares overall. I think if you do a
really good product launch after a
couple years, you might gain a
percentage point of market share. These
are very entrenched, stable market
shares. Waters actually had a chart in
one of their investor days which showed
sales of a specific type of column over
time. We're talking over decades and it
was basically a flat line and this was
because of that point around it being
tied into drug certifications and once
it's tied in people just use the
instruments again and again and again.
If it works and they're getting good
service they generally don't change it.
So that's why that service component is
so key.
>> You mentioned there's stable market
shares. Do those tend to be stable with
the same existing customer base? Is
there a lack of switching that tends to
happen?
>> It's pretty rare that a customer will
build out a whole new lab. They'll
generally be upgrading one section of a
lab. There's that incumbency bias. We
have seen companies talk about some
opportunities where you're getting
pharmaceutical companies thinking about
maybe reshoring labs. That's one of the
few examples where you're getting, you
know, whole new labs being set up and
that's an opportunity where you can kit
out a lab. Increasingly, the service
part is being folded into the discussion
on instruments as well. And this is
benefiting those large incumbents.
Agelant has 4,000 service technicians
that they employ directly. Pretty hard
to compete with that. 75% of their
technicians hold a degree in chemistry
or biochemistry. 25% have a masters or
PhD. So, these are really skilled,
bright people that are out doing two and
a half thousand on-site service calls a
day. They're trying to fold that into
the discussion around instrument sales
more. I would say
>> the point on the risk associated with
switching providers might be the most
meaningful thing. I'm curious, do you
have any data points or measurement for
what the cost of this equipment
represents to the end customer just in
terms of is it a large percentage of the
overall cost of production or anything
else that represents a large or
relatively small piece of that? We're
thinking about a production facility
that maybe has five or so of these sorts
of instruments, maybe slightly different
types. Over those five instruments,
let's say over an 8-year period, they're
spending a million dollars on the
instruments and servicing and
consumables. It's sort of a rounding
error in the scale of a pharmaceutical
production facility over 8 years, both
from a revenue generated, profit
generated or the other costs in that
business. This is one where obviously
the cost of a product failure. So if
you're failing to spot a contaminant or
a problem or something like that, that
cost is almost unquantifiable. The
damage alone to the brand would be huge.
One of the main things you will hear in
these niche markets that represent a
very small percentage of the overall
product but are missionritical is it's a
very good spot to be in if you've
captured market share in those
industries. I'm curious how that impacts
the revenue model broadly. We can break
it down if possible. You gave us some
sense just in terms of volume trends
over time. How do they decide on price
and it might be different obviously for
new equipment versus service and
everything else? But is there a general
framework for how you think about
pricing as it revolves around the
business?
>> They don't give a sort of full
disclosure on price volume, but from our
conversations, it seems like they've
been reasonably cautious on price. So
low single digits in recent years per
year kind of number price rises.
Certainly not the 10 15% we've seen in
the food companies for example. I think
generally they're aware that often
they've got relationships with these
businesses that have been going on for
30 40 50 years and they're much more
focused around maintaining that business
and that strong relationship and
actually they take a little bit less on
price but maybe the customer takes a
service contract or something like that
that more than pays for any loss
pricing. Generally, I'd expect low
singledigit price growth number with a
balance driven by volume.
>> How has revenue trended? Whatever
periods you want to pick, whether it's
three, five, 10, I know you have various
things that impact those, but where does
this business tend to grow and industry
tend to grow at?
>> I'll pick nine if that's okay. Not
because I'm being selective with my date
range. It's the longest that I can go
post the key site spin. It all gets a
bit noisy around that time. Since 2015
or so, sales growth at the business has
averaged about 5% organically, about 6%
reported, so they've done a little bit
of bolt-on M&A. They've had decent
margin growth over that period. EPS has
grown a fair bit faster, about 13%
kagger over that 9-year period. We can
get into margins a bit. Is there a
drastic variance to the extent that they
split it between the various segments?
Is there a massive variance between
equipment sales versus the service and
consumables in terms of margin profile?
>> Yes, and surprisingly consumables and
servicing is a fantastic business. I
think the instrument sales is definitely
more competitive than the servicing. I
think consumables is probably the most
competitive. So the instrument sale
business depends a bit where they're
selling to. Selling to life sciences,
they're making around a 20% operating
margin, but selling to the applied
markets I spoke about, it's a little bit
higher, sort of 24% or so operating
margins. If we think about that
consumable and servicing business,
that's a 34% margin business. It's grown
pretty steadily over time. It's also
been amongst the fastest growing
divisions at 50% of revenue. Obviously,
it's a higher percentage of profit.
Where does that go over time and where
did it come from in terms of it being a
business that's split 50/50 between
those two? What do you expect that trend
line to be? And maybe some context in
the history will be useful as well. I
think rolling back 10 years, I talked to
the very smiley former CEO. He would say
they didn't do an amazing job perhaps at
selling services at the same time they
were making instrument sales. So
typically it was two different teams.
One team would go, "Yes, we sold an
instrument." And then maybe 6 months
later, someone from Agilants, they call
it Cross Lab. It's their servicesvicing
division would walk in and try and sell
their services. by which point maybe a
local technician group, maybe a
competitor had already gone in there and
signed a deal. One of their core
strategic focuses in recent years has
been increasing that attach rate that I
talked about. The percentage of
instruments that have an active service
subscription and they've been pretty
successful at that. So they're in the
low30s percent of active instruments out
there. New instruments sold is obviously
a fair bit higher. And if we were to
look at some of their peers, Waters,
who's been much better for much longer
at selling those servicing contracts
with instruments, they're in the 50s%.
There's definitely a pretty long runway,
I think, on that. And then when you
think about the economics of that
service business, it's a classic density
business whereby you're in a city,
you've got five technicians that operate
in that city to take on 5% more
business. You don't need an extra
person. They're just filling out their
calendar. You've got a fixed cost for
the office. you got an admin team there.
It really scales quite nicely as you
build up density in a local area.
>> In terms of the conversion, you
mentioned earnings growth and that being
quite a bit higher than revenue growth
driven by that margin expansion. How has
the cash flow profile evolved? Whether
it's cash conversion, anything around
free cash flow for the business over
time.
>> Company generates around $1.4 billion or
so of free cash flow a year. It's about
90% of adjusted net income. It's been
pretty stable in recent years, that 90%
number. The primary difference has been
an increase in capex spend in recent
years. They're basically building out a
facility for a new business segment that
they're working on.
>> I would love to hear more about a new
business segment that always adds
something interesting to what feels like
a pretty straight and narrow business
story thus far.
>> Perhaps new business segment is actually
a little bit harsh. It's actually an old
business segment which is growing
rapidly. So they have a notable business
that they call NASD nucleic acid
solutions department NASD produces what
are called oligoucleotides oligos we can
call them they're basically short
strands of labm made DNA or RNA and
they're used to treat some genetic
diseases and importantly in some RNA
based vaccines or drugs including the co
19 vaccine. So these oligos are a key
part of the production process and
they're used typically to help stabilize
the RNA during production. Basically
it's basically a chemical that's used
during the production of these advanced
drugs and vaccines and agent is the
clear leader in producing these. It's
interesting is it was actually initially
a tiny part of agent. It was formed in
2006 by merging some technology agent
already had inhouse which was around
knowledge on RNA molecule synthesis with
a business they acquired called Signpro.
again a tiny company they bought back in
2006. They merged it, kept it running
and then this really took off a few
years ago. They continued to develop it
over basically 20 years and then in 2018
they started to see a lot of orders both
the development and potentially
commercialization of some of these
drugs. At that point they had an
interesting decision to make. They
basically had to either invest $185
million in growing this production
facility or basically not and give away
the business either to someone else or
try and sell that asset. They decided to
invest organically back their engineers
and so they spent $185 million in 2018
and demand continued to grow. So
actually in 2023 they broke ground on a
further $725 million expansion of that
facility. It's in Frederick, Colorado.
So far demand's been really strong and
they're by far the leader in this sort
of niche CDMO sector. It's the same
customers but it's a different product
to what they've done in the past.
>> If cromatography was not complex enough,
I'm glad we've introduced something else
here. It's very interesting to hear how
this has evolved. Am I right to think
that the legacy business is in some ways
selling the piction shovels to the gold
rush here? They're developing an actual
molecule. I'm just curious about the
demand profile for that molecule and how
it might vary versus what you look for
in their legacy business or what else
you would point to in terms of the
differences cuz you tapped into it there
and I'm just curious if you could expand
on that a bit more.
>> They're not generally tied to a single
pharmaceutical company. They work with
basically all of the main manufacturers
of these types of drugs. There is
definitely a more customization for each
specific project. So they generally
partner with them quite early during the
development phase. Agent probably won't
be making very much money on it while
they develop these custom sort of oligos
to support the project. But the payback
is if they make it to commercialization
and some of them are now moving to
commercialization that the volume really
ramps and that stays with Agyant.
There's no other company that has equal
capacity or larger capacity than Agelant
for producing these specialist oligos.
Like most things, it's probably easy to
make in really small quantities, but if
you want to make production grade stuff
where you can make 100,000 vaccines,
then really it's only agyant you can
work with who have that facility. There
are definitely differences. I think
you're right, but it's similar in that
it's not tied to a single all-inone drug
or nothing.
>> Is it tied to the mRNA more broadly that
theme within pharma broadly?
>> Correct. the step back of RNA based
drugs is unhelpful and things like
changing in the funding environment and
things like that. You definitely see
that in some of their results where
companies focus less on R&D one year and
more on commercialization to respond to
funding changes basically.
>> And you mentioned it's gone from small
to it's not huge but it's a much bigger
portion of the business now. What does
it represent versus what it was before?
Their core NASD internally developed is
a little over $300 million now of
revenue. They've also acquired a
business for about a billion dollars
called Biovectra which is in a similar
space. It does slightly different things
but very similar. So altogether they're
about $470 million of revenue. So about
7% of sales or so.
>> Impressive to come from something so
small especially when the rest of the
business is growing alongside you. When
you think about that as a shareholder
you mentioned a bit about the margin
profile not being great in the early
stages. So you're investing with this
long cycle of return. I'm just curious
to get into your head about how that all
felt maybe years back versus where we
are today because it is a bit different
with inside the business and they've
gone from if we go all the way back to
the HP days that being a conglomerate in
many things to much more pure play. How
do you frame that type of somewhat
strategic adaptation to include this
with some of those things in mind?
>> Way back at the start of the
conversation in Agelant's history, I
went through an example where they gave
away or sold for a tiny price a business
that went on to be a core part of
Broadcom today. Obviously, it would have
been nice to have kept hold of that one.
Agent engineers have clearly developed
something that's unique and seeing
demand from customers. It's a healthy
sign that the company is willing to back
them with the capital that they need.
They run a pretty cautious balance
sheet. They've got one times net debt
evid if it's a choice between basically
giving away the opportunity to someone
else who's going to spend that money
backing your own engineers. We were
pretty glad to see they had a culture
firstly where they could reach the right
people to make that kind of decision and
then also where they decided to back
their team and build out that
facilities. We viewed it as a positive.
When it comes to other capital
allocation decisions, you have capex
there reinvesting in the business and
some of the opportunities. You tapped
into some bolt-on M&A historically and
some bigger acquisitions. How core to
the overall agyant thesis is M&A and the
willingness to continue to look for
boltons, other deals that fit the
general thesis of what they're doing. I
think they've got a decent long track
record of doing small bolt-ons. We think
that's a pretty good thing. I wouldn't
say it's a significant driver of growth,
at least in the short term. They've
generally used them for one of two
purposes. One would be to fill in a
small technology gap. So, for example,
they recently acquired a software
business that specializes in lab
productivity software. So now you can
buy your Agyant instrument consumable
service and plug it into this Agyant
piece of software that will track usage
and reorder consumables and call service
technicians automatically if you're a
machine break. All of that kind of stuff
seems pretty logical to acquire a small
business that's doing that. So we like
that. The other would be to add adjacent
products where they're selling to the
same customers. So that would be by
Vectorra recently where they've got this
NASD business that was organic.
Bvectoring had some additional
capabilities particularly around filling
and packaging some of the products that
benefited that NASD
to us felt reasonably sensible. Of
course there's always an element of risk
and as the deals get larger the risk
goes up. So we're keen there's a sort of
upper level on acquisition prices but so
far they seem to be being sensible and I
wouldn't say it's core to the strategy.
>> There's a history of it. It's not core
to the thesis from year to year, but it
can be a nice tack on when executed
well. When thinking about valuation for
Agyant or this type of business in
general, how would you say investors
generally frame valuation for this type
of business, whether there's a specific
methodology and feel free to group
yourself in there with any type of
methodology that you think is relevant.
>> We tend to focus on either free cash
flow yields or price to earnings
multiples. I think we find them the
right mix between simple enough to
ensure usability but also comprehensive
enough to actually be useful. Agyant,
for example, is trading above 4% free
cash flow yield in recent months, which
is close to the highs it's been over the
last 10 years, basically since the
keysite spin, which we view as pretty
reasonable for a business that we think
should be growing earnings high single
digit. That equates to a just sub 20
times price to earnings multiple again
looked reasonable for a business like
Agent where cash conversion is pretty
stable. The two are largely
interchangeable. Generally trying not to
over complicate it. If we really like
the business and we're confident about
the long-term growth, then as long as
the valuation looks reasonable, we're
likely to invest.
>> I admire it. I will not poke any holes
in it. Often times, I love a simple PE
multiple inverted into a cash flow yield
when the earnings conversion is fairly
smooth into free cash flow. So, bonus
points for me on that. Simplicity is
often a good thing. You outlined it
fairly simply even in that response
where there's visibility into high
singledigit earnings growth. You do have
this cash flow conversion. Would you say
there's any tailwinds that could result
in more material outperformance? I
rarely have to mention this in an
episode because usually we get a very
bullish presentation of the different
things. cuz I think this has been very
balanced and fair in terms of presenting
the business and the outlook. Is there
anything that you think is missing or
not mentioned as a potential upside
lever or catalyst?
>> I wouldn't underestimate the need for
telling what is in a sample and the
unusual use cases that pop up for that.
The most recent example of that I point
to is PAS testing or forever chemicals
as they're often referred to in the
press. There's a huge amount of
regulation that's appeared in the last
two, three years around testing food and
the environment and chemicals as well
for the presence of these PAS. They're
long-lasting chemicals that's used in
everything from sort of non-stick pans
to firefighting chemicals. The problem
is they find their way into food and
water and humans and children as well.
And they've been shown to be harmful to
consumers in several studies. There's a
lot of regulation coming in. This is
already a $400 million market growing
20% per year and Agyant is the clear
leader in this market. So this is a sort
of market that popped up overnight where
we need to test this sample. Agelant's
the clear leader in applied market
testing and it's growing like an
absolute weed. So there's definitely
upside from these testing markets
seeming to appear out of thin air.
>> Interesting example that paints the
picture quite well. On the opposite
side, when you think about the risks,
you referenced some of the cycle
exposure that they might have. Is there
anything else, any customer
concentration risk or anything else,
whether it be from overseas, cheaper
products, things along those lines that
stand out to you?
>> The primary risk of the business we
spoke about earlier is that cyclicality
based on those big ends. So, if your
farmer isn't spending, that's not a
great environment for them. They're not
too reliant on US government funding or
anything like that. So academian
government is only just under 10% of
sales and actually the NIH related
funding which is the one that's
particularly under pressure that's only
about 1% of their sales. So it's not a
huge part. China's the only other part
that's hard to forecast. I think we can
be confident about the need for testing
there in the long term. In the short
term of course it can be hard to
predict. They're the main ones I'd point
to.
>> This question will come a bit out of
order but the M&A thesis that I
described within the business. I'm
curious if this is ever a target of M&A
in terms of them being acquired, Agyant
being acquired. Does that come up?
Because it does have certain
characteristics which would fit what
acquirers would look for and I just
wonder if that's ever out there in the
market or in the headlines.
>> I haven't seen that in the market if I'm
honest. It's hard for one of their
direct competitors. Thermopisher would
I'm sure love to buy them. Very
acquisitive company. It's much larger.
You probably could if it really wanted
to. I think the challenge would be you'd
attract competition scrutiny. I
struggled to see that one happening.
Otherwise, we certainly hope they remain
a sort of independent business.
>> Yes. Don't get in the way of
compounding. Well, this has been
fascinating and I think you simplified
some pretty complex topics. So, I
appreciate that. I can say that
personally. The way that we close out
these conversations are with the lessons
that you could potentially take away and
apply elsewhere as an investor. What
would stand out from doing your research
and your experience with Agyant that
might be a takeaway for other investment
work?
>> There's two that came to mind. The first
one would be not to underestimate the
quality of what sounds like a boring
business. If I was to tell you at the
pub about a business that services lab
instruments, you might be forgiven for
telling me to move on. Actually, this is
a fantastic business. 33% operating
margins, growing high single digits with
a really good long growth runway as they
grow that attach rate. not to be
underestimated. The other one would be
that actually often it's better to be in
the businesses that are supplying tools.
In this case, the life science tools
companies have outperformed the
pharmaceutical sector, hands down, and
Agyant is a testament to that. Picks and
shovels. It's been working for almost
200 years now. Well, Mark, this has been
an excellent conversation. It's been a
pleasure. Thank you so much for joining
us.
>> Thank you. To find more episodes of
breakdowns ranging from Costco to Visa
to Madna or to sign up for our weekly
summary, check out join colossus.com.
That's jolsus.com.
[Music]